Technology over the long run: zoom out to see how dramatically the world can change within a lifetime - Our World in DataOur World in DataBrowse by topicDataInsightsResourcesAboutSubscribeDonateGdoc/AdminHomeTechnological ChangeTechnology over the long run: zoom out to see how dramatically the world can change within a lifetimeIt is easy to underestimate how much the world can change within a lifetime. Considering how dramatically the world has changed can help us see how different the world could be in a few years or decades.By: Max RoserFebruary 22, 2023Cite this articleReuse our work freelyTechnology can change the world in ways that are unimaginable until they happen. Switching on an electric light would have been unimaginable for our medieval ancestors. In their childhood, our grandparents would have struggled to imagine a world connected by smartphones and the Internet.Similarly, it is hard for us to imagine the arrival of all those technologies that will fundamentally change the world we are used to.We can remind ourselves that our own future might look very different from the world today by looking back at how rapidly technology has changed our world in the past. That’s what this article is about.One insight I take away from this long-term perspective is how unusual our time is. Technological change was extremely slow in the past – the technologies that our ancestors got used to in their childhood were still central to their lives in their old age. In stark contrast to those days, we live in a time of extraordinarily fast technological change. For recent generations, it was common for technologies that were unimaginable in their youth to become common later in life.The long-run perspective on technological changeThe big visualization offers a long-term perspective on the history of technology.1The timeline begins at the center of the spiral. The first use of stone tools, 3.4 million years ago, marks the beginning of this history of technology.2 Each turn of the spiral represents 200,000 years of history. It took 2.4 million years – 12 turns of the spiral – for our ancestors to control fire and use it for cooking.3To be able to visualize the inventions in the more recent past — the last 12,000 years — I had to unroll the spiral. I needed more space to be able to show when agriculture, writing, and the wheel were invented. During this period, technological change was faster, but it was still relatively slow: several thousand years passed between each of these three inventions.From 1800 onwards, I stretched out the timeline even further to show the many major inventions that rapidly followed one after the other.The long-term perspective that this chart provides makes it clear just how unusually fast technological change is in our time.You can use this visualization to see how technology developed in particular domains. Follow, for example, the history of communication: from writing to paper, to the printing press, to the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, all the way to the Internet and smartphones.Or follow the rapid development of human flight. In 1903, the Wright brothers took the first flight in human history (they were in the air for less than a minute), and just 66 years later, we landed on the moon. Many people saw both within their lifetimes: the first plane and the moon landing.This large visualization also highlights the wide range of technology’s impact on our lives. It includes extraordinarily beneficial innovations, such as the vaccine that allowed humanity to eradicate smallpox, and it includes terrible innovations, like the nuclear bombs that endanger the lives of all of us.What will the next decades bring?The red timeline reaches up to the present and then continues in green into the future. Many children born today, even without further increases in life expectancy, will live well into the 22nd century.New vaccines, progress in clean, low-carbon energy, better cancer treatments – a range of future innovations could very much improve our living conditions and the environment around us. But, as I argue in a series of articles, there is one technology that could even more profoundly change our world: artificial intelligence (AI).One reason why artificial intelligence is such an important innovation is that intelligence is the main driver of innovation itself. This fast-paced technological change could speed up even more if it’s driven not only by humanity’s intelligence but also by artificial intelligence. If this happens, the change currently stretched out over decades might happen within a very brief time span of just a year. Possibly even faster.4I think AI technology could have a fundamentally transformative impact on our world. In many ways, it is already changing our world, as I documented in this companion article. As this technology becomes more capable in the years and decades to come, it can give immense power to those who control it (and it poses the risk that it could escape our control entirely).Such systems might seem hard to imagine today, but AI technology is advancing quickly. Many AI experts believe there is a real chance that human-level artificial intelligence will be developed within the next decades, as I documented in this article.Download imageSubscribe to our newslettersWe send two regular newsletters so you can stay up to date on our work and receive curated highlights from across Our World in Data.SubscribeTechnology will continue to change the world – we should all make sure that it changes it for the betterWhat is familiar to us today — photography, the radio, antibiotics, the Internet, or the International Space Station circling our planet — was unimaginable to our ancestors just a few generations ago. If your great-great-great grandparents could spend a week with you, they would be blown away by your everyday life.What I take away from this history is that I will likely see technologies in my lifetime that appear unimaginable to me today.In addition to this trend towards increasingly rapid innovation, there is a second long-run trend. Technology has become increasingly powerful. While our ancestors wielded stone tools, we are building globe-spanning AI systems and technologies that can edit our genes.Because of the immense power that technology gives those who control it, there is little that is as important as the question of which technologies get developed during our lifetimes. Therefore, I think it is a mistake to leave the question about the future of technology to the technologists. Which technologies are controlled by whom is one of the most important political questions of our time because of the enormous power these technologies convey to those who control them.We all should strive to gain the knowledge we need to contribute to an intelligent debate about the world we want to live in. To a large part, this means gaining knowledge and wisdom on the question of which technologies we want.Continue reading: Our topic page on AIAcknowledgments: I would like to thank my colleagues Hannah Ritchie, Bastian Herre, Natasha Ahuja, Edouard Mathieu, Daniel Bachler, Charlie Giattino, and Pablo Rosado for their helpful comments on drafts of this essay and the visualization. Thanks also to Lizka Vaintrob and Ben Clifford for the conversation that initiated this visualization.This article was first published on February 22, 2023. In October 2024 I made a few adjustments to improve grammar and layout.Appendix: About the choice of visualization in this articleThe recent speed of technological change makes it difficult to picture the history of technology in one visualization. When you visualize this development on a linear timeline, then most of the timeline is almost empty, while all the action is crammed into the right corner:Download imageIn my large visualization here, I tried to avoid this problem and instead show the long history of technology in a way that lets you see when each technological breakthrough happened and how, within the last millennia, there was a continuous acceleration of technological change.Show moreEndnotesThe recent speed of technological change makes it difficult to picture the history of technology in one visualization. In the appendix, I show what this history looks like on a linear time scale.It is, of course, difficult to assess when exactly the first stone tools were used.The research by McPherron et al. (2010) suggested that it was at least 3.39 million years ago. This is based on two fossilized bones found in Dikika in Ethiopia, which showed “stone-tool cut marks for flesh removal and percussion marks for marrow access.” These marks were interpreted as being caused by meat consumption and provide the first evidence that one of our ancestors, Australopithecus afarensis, used stone tools.The research by Harmand et al. (2015) provided evidence for stone tool use in today’s Kenya 3.3 million years ago.References:McPherron et al. (2010) – Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia. Published in Nature.Harmand et al. (2015) – 3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya. Published in Nature.Evidence for controlled fire use approximately 1 million years ago is provided by Berna et al. (2012) Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ fire in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape province, South Africa, published in PNAS.The authors write: “The ability to control fire was a crucial turning point in human evolution, but the question of when hominins first developed this ability still remains. Here we show that micromorphological and Fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy (mFTIR) analyses of intact sediments at the site of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape province, South Africa, provide unambiguous evidence—in the form of burned bone and ashed plant remains—that burning took place in the cave during the early Acheulean occupation, approximately 1.0 Ma. To the best of our knowledge, this is the earliest secure evidence for burning in an archaeological context.”This is what authors like Holden Karnofsky called ‘Process for Automating Scientific and Technological Advancement’ or PASTA. Some recent developments go in this direction: DeepMind’s AlphaFold helped to make progress on one of the large problems in biology, and they have also developed an AI system that finds new algorithms that are relevant to building a more powerful AI.Cite this workOur articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this article, please also cite the underlying data sources. This article can be cited as:Max Roser (2023) - “Technology over the long run: zoom out to see how dramatically the world can change within a lifetime” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/technology-long-run' [Online Resource]BibTeX citation@article{owid-technology-long-run,
    author = {Max Roser},
    title = {Technology over the long run: zoom out to see how dramatically the world can change within a lifetime},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2023},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/technology-long-run}
}Reuse this work freelyAll visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license. You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited.The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution.All of our charts can be embedded in any site.Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone.Help us do this work by making a donation.Donate nowOur World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab, a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY, unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license. Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details.ExploreTopicsDataInsightsResourcesLatest ArticlesSDG TrackerTeaching with OWIDAboutAbout UsOrganizationFundingTeamJobsFAQsRSS FeedsResearch & WritingData InsightsFollow usPrivacy policyLegal disclaimerGrapher license